So far in our code we have always provided all
the parameters manually. In this case the fill
command, we defined 255 as a number as an input
for this command. The same goes for the circle
function, where we provide the x and the y as
well as the diameter as numbers, manually to
our function. But when we try to embrace the idea
of parametric design we're actually trying to go
beyond providing all these parameters manually,
because if we would provide them all manually, we
could also do all of this in a graphics software
and resize and position all the elements manually.
But the idea behind parametric design is
actually to define certain parameters and
then based on those parameters we generate our
shapes, we generate the layout that we want to
achieve. And here is a very simple example. We
start with our sketch, our canvas and we define
the sketch width and the sketch height. These are
our first two parameters. Then inside our sketch
we want to draw a rectangle and we will define the
width and the height for our rectangle, but the x
and the y position of our rectangle, we want to
calculate automatically. This will depend on the
sketch's size and the rectangle's size. And to go
a step further, we will draw another rectangle,
this one should as well be centered on our canvas,
but the size should be dependent on our original
rectangle. This rectangle, the second one, should
have a size 50% width of the original rectangle
and a height of 25% of our original rectangle. For
this rectangle we will not define any parameters
in advance, but calculate them on the fly.
Depending on the other parameters that we have.
If we want to apply this to our code, there is a
concept called variables, that we can use to store
information in. And we will use this, to store our
parameters, so that later on in the code, we can
use those parameters again. There's two different
types of variables that we need to know of,
the first one are the constants. They are defined
by writing the word "const", then we write a name
for our variable. Be careful not to use any kind
of variable names that are already defined by
p5.js or JavaScript. And you will figure this
out through error messages and other output.
For this one, i will use sketchHeight.
define this as 400. A constant variable
cannot be changed in any way, throughout
the coding of our script. The idea is here to have
a constant variable that you can always rely on
being the same as you once defined. And you will
get an error message if you try to change it.
If you have a variable that will change over
time as you write your sketch, for example
you want the size to increase every time the draw
loop is running, then you need to define your
variable with "let". And now again, we define
a name for our variable and then we define
the input, the value, of our variable.
For the naming of variables you shouldn't use
any special characters, like dots or commas and
no spaces. And besides that you can use any
kind of number or letter from the alphabet
and just be careful not to use any spaces.
In JavaScript a certain style of writing
variables or functions in general or any kinds
of elements in general, and the idea is here,
if you have a function or variable that
consists of multiple words, you combine
the words by writing the first letter of each word
as a capital. There's different styles of writing
functions and variables in different programming
languages. In python for example they use
an underscore to differentiate between different
words and in JavaScript they use these capitals.
Now when we want to reuse
our variable we can simply
write the name, that we defined up here
in the code. I can just write sketchWidth
and sketchHeight.
Press on save. And see, it worked, now
anywhere in our code we can use the word
to refer to this value, that we defined in the
beginning of our sketch. And in variables we can
also store other things. We can for example
store text. To store text in a variable,
we simply need to use the quotes again. Again it
doesn't matter if you use single or double quotes,
just use the same at beginning and
end. And now we can add some text here.
This is also referred to as a "string".
Then we have of course the bool.
Boolean variable is simply true or
false. This can be helpful for example
if you're drawing something and in certain
instances you don't want it to be drawn.
Then you can check if the variable is true or
false and then draw your element or don't draw it.
A quick add-on to the numeric
variable. In JavaScript
there's only numeric variables.
But in other programming
languages there is a differentiation
between integers and float. Integers are
round numbers without any decimals. And the floats
have decimals like 1.5. In JavaScript
this doesn't really matter,
but if you're later on maybe switching to
Python or any other programming languages,
you have to really watch out for if there is an
integer or a float that is being required here.
Now let's make use of our variables. First
off, we need two more variables. If we look at
our little drawing here, we have the box width
and the box height so let's also define those.
Now i will change this to a rectangle down here
and then we have the boxWidth and boxHeight.
And if i draw this, i now have the box here,
but we actually want it in the center so how
can we get it there. Now comes a little bit
of math into play. If we look at our sketch,
we have the sketchWidth and we have the boxWidth.
What is the x position of our box? It's the
sketchWidth minus the boxWidth, divided by two.
Because we have the same spacing on each side.
What we simply need to write here is:
sketchWidth minus boxWidth, divided by two.
And to make it mathematically correct, we need
to put some brackets around here. And then we
can do the same for the y position. I will just
organize this a little bit more neatly here,
by adding some line breaks. Again line breaks have
no effect in JavaScript on these kind of things.
And now we need to replace sketchHeight.
And let's see if it worked out? Now
it's centered. What is nice about using
variables to define these kind of things and
calculate these kind of visual dependencies,
is that we can now simply change the parameters.
For example we can make our sketchWidth 700
and automatically everything is calculated. The
box is still in the middle, because we have this
mathematical function that calculates the correct
position automatically for us, which is great.
Let's take it a step further.
We have this additional box,
which should be dependent on the first one. We
will draw this in red, so that we can see it.
And i would simply copy the
code from here and now i will
add some additional variables. I could also
write all the calculations in the rect function,
but i usually find it a little bit more cleaner
and easier to read if you don't write super long
mathematical functions, but try to split it
up into smaller chunks, that you can reuse.
So for this, i will simply name it smallWidth
and smallHeight. The idea was, that we have the
boxWidth and we have 50%, so times 0.5 and the
boxHeight should be 25%, so it's times 0.25.
I save this and then i simply need
to place my new variables in here.
And of course they also need to go
here. And now you can already see
why it was useful to place the smallWidth
and smallHeight into additional variables,
because if you wouldn't have done this, we would
need to run the calculations in two places,
so twice. It's better to have them in a variable
here. We only need to do the calculations once.
Let's save this and see what happens.
Now we can see, we have this nicely
organized smaller rectangle in our bigger
rectangle. And again what is great about this,
i can now for example change the boxWidth to
100 and automatically, our boxes are resized
depending on one another. Now you can build upon
this and build more complex layouts that are being
generated based on the variables you define in one
place that are then being used all over your code.